Turkey Aims to Offload Russian Air-Defense System as It Seeks to Buy U.S. F-35s
Proposed deal would entail transferring S-400 to U.A.E. in hopes it would unblock purchase of advanced American jets
By 
Jared Malsin
, 
Robbie Gramer
 and 
Summer Said
July 18, 2026 at 10:08 am ET




Gift unlocked article
Military officials working around a Russian transport aircraft unloading parts of S-400 air defense systems.
Parts of the Russian S-400 system, seen at a Turkish airport in this 2019 photo released by the Turkish Defense Ministry. TURKISH DEFENSE MINISTRY/AP

Quick Summary
Turkey is in talks to transfer its Russian S-400 air-defense system to the U.A.E. to clear U.S. objections to its purchase of F-35 warplanes, officials said.
View more
ISTANBUL—Turkey is in talks to transfer a sophisticated Russian air-defense system to the United Arab Emirates in hopes of clearing American objections to its purchase of advanced F-35 warplanes, U.S. and regional officials familiar with the matter said.

The U.S. removed Turkey from a program to buy and help build the F-35 in 2019 after it bought an S-400 system from Russia. The U.S. worries having the two advanced technologies operating side by side in Turkey could allow the S-400 to learn key details of the F-35, including its radar signature, and share them with Moscow.

The discussions with the U.A.E. come after President Trump visited Turkey earlier this month for a summit of NATO leaders at which he said he planned to lift restrictions on the country’s purchase of the U.S. jets.

Trump has embraced Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdogan as a geopolitical partner who plays an outsize role in diplomacy in the Middle East and the Russia-Ukraine war. 

The U.A.E. meanwhile is working to shore up its air defenses in response to Iranian drone and missile attacks that have battered Gulf states during this year’s war.

The White House declined to comment, referring to recent comments from Trump that he was considering selling the F-35 to Turkey. The U.A.E. didn’t reply to requests for comment. 

The Russian Defense Ministry and the Turkish Foreign Ministry didn’t respond to requests for comment on the matter. 

A spokesman for the Turkish Defense Ministry told reporters Thursday that work on the issue was ongoing, without elaborating. The Kremlin confirmed earlier in July that it was in contact with Turkey about the S-400. 

Despite the alignment of interests, the proposal faces a series of hurdles. Turkey would need Russian approval to re-export the S-400. The U.A.E. might also need a green light, explicit or otherwise, from Russia and the U.S. that it could receive the S-400 without triggering a diplomatic crisis with either party.

Turkey also would likely seek U.S. guarantees that it could obtain the F-35 once the deal was complete, a complicated prospect that requires a certification that Turkey is in compliance with U.S. law. It could also face opposition from skeptical members of U.S. Congress who have a role in approving major weapons sales.

The U.A.E. also clinched a deal with the U.S. to acquire the F-35, though that agreement has been stalled for half a decade.

The Trump administration maintains close ties with the U.A.E. and has lauded it for its role in supporting the U.S. in the war with Iran.

Turkey is now one of only about half a dozen countries to have the Russian S-400 on its soil, along with China and India.

The impasse around the system has driven a wedge between major allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. In addition to the concerns about F-35 flight details, Western defense officials have been concerned about the possible integration of the Russian system into NATO air defenses and the potential presence of Russian personnel.

Congress sharply pushed back against Turkey’s decision to acquire the S-400, passing legislation that led to the imposition of sanctions on Turkey and blocked it from the F-35.

Located near Russia and Iran, and with growing tension with Israel, Turkey faces a range of aerial threats and has long been seeking to upgrade its air force including by acquiring the highly advanced F-35. 

U.S. lawmakers who visited Ankara earlier this month for the NATO summit said they supported a deal that would see Turkey remove its S-400s and obtain the F-35.

The talks signal new resolve by Erdogan’s government to settle the dispute, analysts say.

“The rhetoric out of Ankara has changed nearly 180 degrees,” said Aaron Stein, a longtime Turkey analyst and president of the Foreign Policy Research Institute. “Whether or not that results in success and success quickly is something different, but at least they’re engaging on the topic.”

Some U.S. lawmakers have still voiced misgivings about bringing Turkey back into the F-35 program, citing Israel’s opposition to a sale it fears could undercut its air superiority in the Middle East. Rep. Dina Titus (D., Nev.) co-authored a letter on July 6 to House leaders opposing Turkey’s readmission to the F-35 program in part over its “aggressive posture toward Greece and Cyprus.” Titus is vice-chair of the Congressional caucus on Hellenic issues.

Turkey had been part of the multinational program contributing to the development and construction of the F-35. The U.S. sanctions and removal from the program cost it billions of dollars in potential defense contracts. 

U.S. and Turkish officials have discussed a range of solutions to the S-400 problem over the years, including sending it to a third country. Ukraine was proposed as one destination following the Russian invasion.

The possibility of sending it to a Gulf country emerged during the war with Iran as Iranian missile and drone attacks strained U.S. allies’ air defenses, regional officials said.

In recent years, the U.S. and Turkey have also discussed the possibility of delivering the S-400 to American military personnel who could disable the system’s ability to threaten U.S. aircraft.

Advertisement


Erdogan in recent years has sought to leverage his ties to Russian President Vladimir Putin in attempts to broker peace in the war in Ukraine while also helping arm Ukrainian forces with Turkish-made drones, warships and armored vehicles.