The Threat to Saudi Arabia’s Main Oil-Export Route Is Growing
Iran-backed Houthi militia has shut off Red Sea before, and its leader is again warning of escalation
By 
Stephen Kalin
 and Saleh al-Batati
July 17, 2026 11:01 am ET




34

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(7 min)


Satellite image showing oil infrastructure at Saudi Arabia's Red Sea port of Yanbu.
Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea port of Yanbu, fed by a cross-country pipeline, provides a vital outlet for oil. 2026 Planet Labs PBC/AFP/Getty Images

Quick Summary





Houthi-Saudi hostilities are threatening Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea oil export route, a key workaround for the blocked Strait of Hormuz.
View more

Growing hostilities between Saudi Arabia and Yemen’s Iran-backed Houthi militia are raising the threat to a crucial oil-export route that the kingdom has been using to work around the blockage in the Strait of Hormuz.

A pipeline routing oil west across the country to a port on the Red Sea has allowed it to keep up export volumes during the U.S.’s war with Iran. From there, its tankers sail through the chokepoint at Bab al-Mandeb and out to its main markets in Asia, stabilizing prices at a time when shipping in the Persian Gulf has been bottled up by Iranian attacks.

So far, Bab al-Mandeb has been kept open by Saudi diplomacy with the Houthis, whose intermittent attacks crippled Red Sea shipping on and off over the past three years. But a 2022 truce underlying those efforts is breaking down.

This map shows the East-West Pipeline crossing Saudi Arabia towards the port of Yanbu, and then the strategic waterway of the Bab el Mandeb, between Yemen and Djibouti, that ships would then have to pass to reach the ocean.
© OpenStreetMap contributors
Carl Churchill/WSJ
The Houthis fired drones and missiles at a civilian airport in southwestern Saudi Arabia after the militant group accused the kingdom of bombing an airport runway in the Houthi-controlled capital of San’a this week to prevent an Iranian plane from landing.

Then on Thursday, the Houthis’ reclusive leader doubled down, lashing out at Saudi Arabia in an angry televised speech. “The real equation is this: San’a airport for Riyadh airport,” Abdul Malik al-Houthi said. “The equation is airports for airports, seaports for seaports, and blockade for blockade.” 

The militant leader threatened to target Saudi oil facilities if Riyadh, which led a coalition against the Houthi insurgency more than a decade ago, goes back to war in Yemen. He also called on his supporters to rally on Friday to protest restrictions on free movement in and out of the country, which the Saudis and their Yemeni allies have imposed for years. The Houthis are expected to test Saudi resolve again by trying to land another Iranian plane in San’a soon.

Houthi supporters rally in San'a against the Saudi-led coalition's restrictions.
Houthi supporters rallied Friday in San'a, Yemen, against restrictions on freedom of movement. Khaled Abdullah/Reuters
While al-Houthi said little to indicate an imminent return to attacks against ships transiting the Red Sea, analysts assess the regional dynamics could still lead the militants back to taking shots at ships passing by Yemeni shores.

The last Houthi shutdown of traffic drew an American military response in 2025 that battered the group. The attacks nevertheless continued sporadically and snarled shipping for months.

This time, any disruption would happen while transit through the Strait of Hormuz is getting choked off by Iranian attacks. Consulting firm Capital Economics predicts that a prolonged, simultaneous closure of the waterways—or significant damage to Saudi pipeline or port infrastructure—could push the global economy into a recession.

The war with Iran and its stranglehold on Hormuz have taken millions of barrels of oil a day off the market. Global consumers have made up for the gap by pulling down inventories, but they will eventually run low.

Workarounds have bought some time. Saudi Arabia has used the pipeline running across the Arabian Peninsula to export about four million barrels a day of crude oil via the Red Sea, keeping its overall exports around 4.6 million barrels a day. That’s down from 7.3 million barrels a day before the war, but the gap would be a lot wider without the Red Sea barrels.

Analysts say the Houthis feel strategically emboldened by a perception that Iran has outmaneuvered the U.S. and see an opportunity to gain an advantage by pressing the Saudis, who have strong incentives to keep Yemen out of the regional conflict.

“The Houthis smell this, they know this,” said April Longley Alley, a former senior political adviser to the United Nations’ special envoy to Yemen. “They see an opportunity to up the ante, and they’re going to take it.”

A vessel in the Strait of Hormuz, seen from Musandam, Oman.
Traffic in the Strait of Hormuz has thinned dramatically as a result of the Iran war. Reuters
The two sides now appear closer to resuming at least low-level hostilities than at any time since reaching a truce in 2022 that ended virtually all cross-border attacks following seven years of fighting.

The agreement was meant to trigger steps including an easing of Saudi restrictions on fuel entering Yemen’s Red Sea port of Hodeidah and a resumption of commercial flights in and out of San’a, but there has been little progress.

The U.S. supported the Saudi-led campaign to intervene in Yemen’s civil war against the Houthis starting in 2015. Analysts say Washington will support Saudi Arabia but has its hands full with Iran and will try to avoid another direct engagement in Yemen.

U.S. and Saudi officials spoke earlier this week about Yemen, and the State Department approved the sale of some $2 billion worth of weapons to Saudi Arabia, including more than 20,000 kits for precision-guided munitions.

The immediate flashpoint for further violence is likely to remain San’a airport, which holds symbolic value for both sides. Saudi Arabia worries that loosening restrictions will allow Iran to resupply the Houthis with weapons and military advisers.

Analysts say the Houthis, under pressure at home from skyrocketing prices and dwindling supplies of basic necessities, are motivated to force open the air route. 

“For them this is a domestically driven calculation to get a better deal that gets them more resources, more autonomy, more freedom to consolidate their control in Yemen and in the Red Sea basin,” said Alley, who is now a senior fellow at the Washington Institute think tank.

The Houthis have long bristled at Saudi-imposed restrictions on movement in and out of Yemen. The funeral this month of slain Iranian leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei gave them an opportunity to test Riyadh’s appetite for fresh confrontation.

A Houthi delegation flew to Tehran two weeks ago, drawing protests from the head of Yemen’s internationally recognized government, who lives in exile in Riyadh. The delegation’s return this week was diverted to another Houthi-controlled city after San’a airport was bombed.

If another flight is attempted and Riyadh strikes San’a airport, the Houthis are likely to ratchet up their response, which in turn could prompt the Saudis to retaliate more harshly despite their eagerness to avoid exposing their homeland to counterattacks.

A digital billboard displays Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman during a Houthi protest in Sana'a, Yemen.
A display at a Houthi protest in San'a shows the Saudi crown prince and text reading “We dare you” in Arabic. Yahya Arhab/EPA/Shutterstock
Mohammed al-Basha, founder of Basha Report, a Washington-based risk-advisory firm, said the Houthis publicly updated their rules of engagement this week, saying Saudi Arabia risks renewed conflict if it tries to stop new flights from Iran. 

“Abdul Malik does things gradually,” he said of the Houthi leader. “It’s an escalation ladder. He doesn’t go full in. He doesn’t want full war.”

One major factor that drove Saudi Arabia to agree to the 2022 truce was Houthi drone and missile strikes on the kingdom’s cities, including Riyadh, which jeopardized the ambitious economic development plans of Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman. 

Renewed Houthi attacks now would likely be even more damaging. Saudi air defenses have improved, but so too have the Houthis’ offensive capabilities, and the kingdom’s development efforts have been weighed down by cost overruns and the political risk brought on by the war with Iran.

